# 03. GroupBy and OrderBy

**Aggregating data** (also referred to as windows, rolling up, summarizing, or grouping data) is creating some sort of total from a number of records. **Sum, min, max, count, and average** are common aggregate operations. In SQL you can group these totals on any specified columns, allowing you to control the scope of these aggregations easily.

## 3.1 Grouping records

Count the number of records in a table is the most simple and common aggregating function in SQL. Below query count the total records number of table station_data

```sql
select count(*) as record_number from station_data
```

We can also add some condition to count the records number of certain group, below query count the records number where is tornado

```sql
-- remeber for true condition, we can ommit the equal
select count(*) as tornado_record_number from station_data where tornado=1;
select count(*) as tornado_record_number from station_data where tornado;
```

By we have too many records, what if we want to separate the count by year

```sql
select year, count(*) as tornado_record_number from station_data where tornado groupby year;
```

The output of the above query suddenly becomes more meaningful. We now see the tornado sighting count by year.

### 3.1.1 Grouping by using multiple columns

We can group data by using multiple columns. If we retake the above example, we want more precision. We can group data by year and month. Run the below query

```sql
select year, month, count(*) as tornado_record_number from station_data where tornado group by year, month
```

Alternatively, we can use **ordinal positions instead of the column names** in the GROUP BY. The ordinal positions correspond to each item’s numeric position in the SELECT statement. So, instead of writing GROUP BY year, month, we could instead make it GROUP BY 1, 2 (note, **it starts by 1 not 0**). Below query is an example

```sql
select year, month, count(*) as tornado_record_number from station_data where tornado group by 1,2
```


## 3.2 Ordering records

Notice that the month column in above example is not in a natural order that we would expect. To make them in order, we can use the ORDER BY operator, which you can put at the end of a SQL statement (after any WHERE and GROUP BY).


```sql
select year, month, count(*) as record_number from station_data where tornado group by year, month order by month;
```

Above query order the final result by month, we can notice the order of year is broken in the result. So we need to ordery by year first then by month.

```sql
select year, month, count(*) as record_number from station_data where tornado group by year, month order by year, month;
```

You can notice that by default, the sorting order is in ascending order. If you want to sort in descending order instead, you need to apply the DESC operator to the ordering of year to make more recent records appear at the top of the results. Check the below query's output

```sql
select year, month, count(*) as record_number from station_data where tornado group by year, month order by year desc, month;
```

## 3.3 Aggregate functions

We already used the COUNT(*) function to count records. But there are other aggregation functions, including SUM() , MIN() , MAX() , and AVG().

### 3.3.1 count

If you specify a column instead of an asterisk, it will count the number of non-null values in that column. For instance, we can take a count of snow_depth recordings, which will count the number of non-null values.

```sql
select count(snow_depth) as records_count from station_data;
```

### 3.3.2 Average

If you wanted to find the average temperature for each month since 2000, you could filter for years 2000 and later, group by month, and perform an average on temp

```sql
select month, avg(temperature) from station_data where year>=2000 group by month;
```

Here we don't group by year, because we want avg of each month of a year. If we group by year, month. There will be only one record in each month, it does not make any sense as average.


You can notice the result has too much precision, you can use the round() function to ommit some precisions.

```sql
select month, round(avg(temperature),2) as avg_temperature from station_data where year>=2000 group by month;
```

### 3.3.3 SUM

SUM() is another common aggregate operation. To find the sum of snow depth of each year since 2000, run this query:

```sql
select year,sum(snow_depth) as total_snow from station_data where year>=2000 group by year;
```


### 3.3.4 Multiple aggregation function in one query

There is **no limitation on how many aggregate operations you can use in a single query**. Below query can find the total_snow, max_precipitation and total_precipitation for each year since 2000 in a single query.


```sql
select year, 
sum(snow_depth) as total_snow, 
max(precipitation) as max_precipitation, 
sum(precipitation) as total_precipitation 
from station_data 
where year>=2000
group by year;

```

### 3.3.5 Use where to get specific aggregations

We can achieve some very **specific aggregations by leveraging the WHERE**. If you wanted the total precipitation by year only when a tornado was present, you would just have to filter on tornado being true. Below query will only include tornado-related precipitation in the totals

```sql
select year, 
sum(precipitation) as total_tornado_precipitation
from station_data
where year>=2000 and tornado
group by year;
```

## 3.4 The having statement

We can use **where** to filter rows that satisfied certain conditions. But we can't use it to filter the aggregated value. **The way aggregation works is that the
software processes record by record, finding which ones it wants to keep based on the WHERE condition. After that, it crunches the records down on the GROUP BY and performs any aggregate functions, such as SUM(). If we wanted to filter on the SUM() value, we would need the filter to take place after it is calculated.**

To filter the aggregated value, we need to use **HAVING**. HAVING is the aggregated equivalent to WHERE. The WHERE keyword filters individual records, but HAVING filters aggregations.

Below query output only the rows that have sum(precipitation)>30

```sql
SELECT year,
SUM(precipitation) as total_precipitation
FROM station_data
GROUP BY year
HAVING total_precipitation > 30
```

Note that **some platforms, including Oracle**, do not support aliases in the HAVING statement (just like the GROUP BY ). This means you must specify the aggregate function again in the HAVING statement.

For instance, the above query in oracle must be written as followed

```sql
SELECT year,
SUM(precipitation) as total_precipitation
FROM station_data
GROUP BY year
HAVING SUM(precipitation) > 30
```

## 3.5 Get distinct record

It is not uncommon to want a set of distinct results from a query. We know there are 28,000 records in our station_data table. But suppose we want to get a distinct list of the station_number values?

```sql
-- This query shows the number of distinct station_number
select count(distinct(station_number)) from station_data

-- Get the duplication number of each station number
select station_number, count(*) as dup_record from station_data group by station_number order by dup_record;

-- These two query returns the same result
select distinct(station_number) from station_data;

select distinct station_number from station_data;

```

distinct operator can be applied on multiple columns. Below query shows an example

```sql
-- bad query
select distinct(station_number, year) from station_data;

-- good query
select distinct station_number, year from station_data;
```

Note when we apply distinct on multiple column, we can not use the distinct() version.