# 06. Building a database

## 6.1 Data base design
There are critical questions that should drive your design, when you create your own tables to support your business:

Design questions
- What are the business requirements?
- What tables will I need to fulfill those requirements?
- What columns will each table contain?
- How will the tables be normalized?
- What will their parent/child relationships be?

## 6.2 Populating data
**Populating data** should be part of the planning process too. If the data is not maintainable and kept up to
date, then the design has already failed. This factor is often overlooked and can easily cause a database project to fail. 

Data questions
- How much data will be populated into these tables?
- Who/what will populate the data into these tables?
- Where will the data come from?
- Do we need processes to automatically populate the tables?

## 6.3 Security
For centralized databases, security factors should be considered.
Security questions
- Who should have access to this database?
- Who should have access to which tables? Read-only access? Write access?
- Is this database critical to business operations?
- What backup plans do we have in the event of disaster/failure?
- Should we log the changes to tables?
- If the database is used for websites or web applications, is it secure?

## 6.4 Design a database for the following scenario

Imagine you have an application that registers all existing startup companies, and provide
We need to design a database to manage the :
- attendees:  are registered users (including some VIPs) who are checking out the startup companies. **Each attendee’s 
  ID, name, phone number, email, and VIP status** will need to be tracked.
  
- companies: are the companies. The **company ID, company name, company description, and primary contact** (who should be listed as an attendee) for
each must be tracked
  
- presentations: Some companies will schedule to do a presentation for a specific slot of time (with a start time and end time). 
  The company leading the presentation as well as a room number must also be booked for each presentation slot
  
- rooms: There will be rooms available for the presentations, each with a **room ID number, a floor number, and a seating capacity**
  
- presentation_attendance: If attendees are interested in hearing a company’s presentation, they can acquire a
ticket (with a ticket ID) and be allowed in. To implement this, the PRESENTATION_ATTENDANCE table will track
the **ticket IDs and pair the presentations with the attendees through their respective IDs** to show who was where
  
### 6.4.1 Primary and foreign keys

**A primary key is a special field (or combination of fields) that provides a unique identity to each record**

Do not confuse the primary key with a foreign key. **The primary key exists in the parent table, but the foreign key 
exists in the child table**. The foreign key in a child table points to the primary key in its parent table. 

For example, the ATTENDEE_ID in the ATTENDEE table is a primary key, but the ATTENDEE_ID in the PRESENTATION_ATTENDANCE 
table is a foreign key.