# 07. Managing data in a database

## 7.1 Adding records (Insert)

Note, almost all programing language can insert data into a database, so you do not have to use sql query

Below query INSERT an ATTENDEE record into the SurgeTech database we created in the last chapter. 

```sql
INSERT INTO ATTENDEE (FIRST_NAME, LAST_NAME)
VALUES ('Foo','Bar')
```

You can notice, we did not provide values for all columns. 
- The id column is the primary key, the auto increment will assign a value automatically.
- Phone and Email column is nullable, so without value, they are just null
- VIP column has a default value, so without value, it will use the default value.

### 7.1.1 Multiple insert

We can insert multiple rows with a single query
```sql
INSERT INTO ATTENDEE (FIRST_NAME, LAST_NAME, PHONE, EMAIL, VIP)
VALUES
('Haha', 'Skeeter',4802185842,'john.skeeter@rex.net', 1),
('Alice','Scala',2156783401,'sam.scala@gmail.com', 0),
('Bob','Fisher',5932857296,'brittany.fisher@outlook.com', 0)
```

### 7.1.2 Insert by using select
We can also insert records by using the results from a SELECT query. Just make sure the SELECT fields line up with 
the INSERT fields and have the same order and data types.

```sql
INSERT INTO ATTENDEE (FIRST_NAME, LAST_NAME, PHONE, EMAIL)
SELECT FIRST_NAME, LAST_NAME, PHONE, EMAIL
FROM SOME_OTHER_TABLE
```

### 7.1.3 Testing the foreign key constrains

Below query insert a record to company table, and it uses a PRIMARY_CONTACT_ID that does not exist in the Attendee table.
Let's see what happens?

```sql
INSERT INTO COMPANY (NAME, DESCRIPTION, PRIMARY_CONTACT_ID)
VALUES ('RexApp Solutions', 'A mobile app delivery service', 105)
```

Normally, you should see the following error:
```text
Error while executing SQL query on database 'surgetech_conference': FOREIGN KEY constraint failed
```
This means our foreign key constrain worked. You can change the PRIMARY_CONTACT_ID to a value that exist in the Attendee table.
It should work fine. Below is an example

```sql
INSERT INTO COMPANY (NAME, DESCRIPTION, PRIMARY_CONTACT_ID)
VALUES ('RexApp Solutions', 'A mobile app delivery service', 3)
```

## 7.2 Deleting records

The DELETE statement is dangerously simple. It deletes all records in a table if you don't specify any condition

```sql
-- create a test table
CREATE TABLE Test (
ID INTEGER PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT,
NAME VARCHAR (30) NOT NULL);

-- add some records
INSERT INTO Test(NAME)
value ("toto"),
("titi"),
("tata");

-- Delete all records
DELETE FROM Test;

-- Delete some records that match certain conditions
Delete from test where name ="titi";
```

**Good practice: Before you run delete, use a select query to check what records you will delete.**

Note, after the delete, if you insert new records, the id will be increment start from the record that are deleted, not
from 0;

### 7.2.1 TRUNCATE table

On some database platforms (like MySQL) the preferred way to delete all records from a table is to use **TRUNCATE TABLE**.
But SQLite does not support **TRUNCATE**.

```sql
TRUNCATE TABLE ATTENDEE
```

The truncate command will allow the database engine to **reset the autoincrements for any primary keys as well as 
any other constraint behaviors. It also allows it to make some optimizations behind the scenes to reset the table**.

## 7.3 UPDATE Table

The UPDATE command modifies existing records. If we wanted to update the EMAIL values for all records to be uppercase, 
we could use below query:

```sql
UPDATE ATTENDEE SET EMAIL = UPPER(EMAIL)
```

We can also update multiple fields at once. Just **separate each expression after the SET keyword with a comma**. To 
update both the FIRST_NAME and LAST_NAME fields to uppercase, run this command:

```sql
UPDATE ATTENDEE SET FIRST_NAME = UPPER(FIRST_NAME),
LAST_NAME = UPPER(LAST_NAME)

```

Like with DELETE , we can **use a WHERE to conditionally apply updates to records. Execute the following query to set
the VIP field to true where the ATTENDEE_ID is 3 or 4

```sql
UPDATE ATTENDEE SET VIP = 1
WHERE ATTENDEE_ID IN (3,4)
```

## 7.4 DROP TABLE

There may be times where you want to remove a table altogether from the database. Just type DROP TABLE followed by 
the name of the table you want to delete. 
**This is a dangerous statement as well because it deletes the table permanently, so be careful and certain about what you are doing**

```sql
DROP TABLE MY_UNWANTED_TABLE
```
